
                Updated: Feb 7, 2025, 2:24pm 
             
					Updated: Feb 7, 2025, 2:24pm 
				 Reviewed By Reviewed By While both the old and new regimes have merits and demerits, it can be cumbersome for taxpayers to pick the best-suited tax regime. Here is a simplified assessment of both regimes to answer a few pertinent questions. The Government of India introduced a new optional tax rate regime for salaried individuals and pensioners during the Union Budget 2020-21. The new tax regime has been made as a default one, and the taxpayers will have to select the old tax regime if they wish to use it. It is to be noted that while the new regime provides a lower tax rate for specific tax slabs, the old tax regime has enough room for claiming deductions under Chapter VI-A against various allowances forming part of salary (e.g., HRA, LTA, etc) and also for specified investments or expenses such as Public Provident Fund (PPF), National Pension Scheme (NPS), repayment of housing loan, payment of tuition fees, etc.  Here’s what you need to know about the new tax and old tax regimes. The latest income tax slabs and rates under the new regime are effective from April 1, 2025, are as follows: The Union Budget 2025-26 has revised the tax slab rates for salaried individuals and pensioners as follows: 5% for taxable income of INR 4 lakh to INR 8 lakh, 10% for INR 8 lakh to INR 12 lakh, 15% for INR 12 lakh to INR 16 lakh, 20% for INR 16 lakh to INR 20 lakh, 25% for INR 20 lakh to INR 24 lakh, and 30% for income above INR 24 lakh. The Union Budget 2025-26 has kept the tax slab rates unchanged for salaried individuals below 60 years old. The existing tax slab rates are as follows: nil for individuals earning up to INR 2.5 lakh, 5% for taxable income above INR 2.5 lakh to INR 5 lakh, 20% for INR 5 lakh to INR 10 lakh, and 30% for income above INR 10 lakh. The simplified new tax rate regime requires specified tax deductions and exemptions to be forgone. Therefore, it is important to evaluate the impact of deductions or exemptions you can claim. Some of the widespread tax exemptions or deductions that are claimable under the old tax regime include: A salaried employee or self-employed individuals may opt for the new tax regime based on their specific situation and sources of income. Switching between the old and new to the new tax regime can be done either on a year-on-year basis or only once. However, the frequency mostly depends on the source of income during the year. In the case where an individual or HUF has income from a business or profession, once the option to avail new tax rates for a financial year has been exercised, the new rates shall apply for subsequent years. However, the law provides such taxpayers one single option of switching back to the old tax regime should their circumstances change. Remember, this switch-back option is available only once in a lifetime unless the taxpayer ceases to have any income from a business or profession. If an individual or HUF does not possess income from a business or profession, the selection can be made on a year-on-year basis. For individuals with salaries, the employer is required to withhold tax before the payment of the salaries. The employee is, however, required to inform the employer regarding their preferred tax rates.  An employee may choose between old and new tax regimes at the beginning of the year and intimate the employer or when starting a new job during the year. However, the employee can change the tax regime when filing the personal tax return.  For example, at the beginning of the year, an employee opts for the new tax regime and the employer deducts tax based on slab rates under the new tax regime. However, during the year they make certain tax-deductible investments like contribution to provident fund, payment of medical insurance premium, etc., and at the time of filing the income tax returns (ITR), they realize the old tax regime is more beneficial to them. In such a situation, they have the choice to opt for the old tax regime while filing the tax return, even though the employer withheld taxes based on the new tax regime. The decision to remain in the old tax regime or to switch to the new one shall be based on the tax savings deductions and exemptions you are eligible for in the old tax regime.  The breakeven point is the amount at which there will be no difference in tax liability between the two tax regimes.  Suppose your total eligible deductions and exemptions in the old tax regime are higher than the breakeven threshold for your income level. In that case, it is advisable to stay in the old regime. On the other hand, if the breakeven threshold is higher, moving to the new tax regime is more beneficial for you. Currently, a taxpayer with income from a business or profession is required to file Form 10IE to opt for the new tax regime. This form was introduced in October 2020. As per the amendments proposed by the Union Budget 2023 in the new tax regime, from FY 2023-24 onwards, taxpayers will be required to opt for the old tax regime, and the new tax regime will be the default option. The tax department will prescribe the manner of opting for the old tax regime in due course. Both tax regimes hold advantages and disadvantages. The old tax structure uplifts taxpayers to cultivate a habit of saving, while the new tax structure favors employees with lower earnings and investments, resulting in fewer deductions and exemptions.  The new tax regime is considered safer and more straightforward, involving fewer records and reducing the potential for tax evasion fraud. However, due to the unique nature of individual deductions and exemptions, a thorough comparison of the two regimes is necessary to determine the best fit for each employee. While the new regime provides a lower tax rate for specific tax slabs, the old tax regime has enough room for claiming deductions under Chapter VI-A against various allowances forming part of salary such as HRA, LTA, and also for specified investments or expenses such as PPF, NPS repayment of housing loan, payment of tuition fees, etc. Which tax regime is better for you depends on the amount of tax-saving investments you have made. While deciding which tax regime is better, consider tax savings deductions and exemptions available under the old tax regime. Choosing between two tax regimes may vary from person to person. It is advisable to do a comparative analysis and evaluation under both regimes and then select as per requirement. Taxpayers can broadly estimate and compare tax liability under the new and old tax regimes using the Income and Tax Calculator on the Income Tax Portal. Form 10-IEA must be filed to opt to pay taxes under the old tax regime. 
						Dipen Pradhan is a Staff Reporter for Forbes Advisor India. He has more than 10 years of experience in journalism. He covers the personal finance beat. When he is not writing, he enjoys documenting the community's ethnic knowledge, and travels to explore rural hotspots.
					 
						Aashika is the India Editor for Forbes Advisor. Her 15-year business and finance journalism stint has led her to report, write, edit and lead teams covering public investing, private investing and personal investing both in India and overseas. She has previously worked at CNBC-TV18, Thomson Reuters, The Economic Times and Entrepreneur.
					