Invest Tools Holidays Trade Tools Learning Center Help Center Resources About Us Personal Finance News 4 min read | Updated on February 03, 2025, 14:08 IST SUMMARY Budget 2025 income tax expectations: The finance minister may consider increasing the basic exemption limit under the new regime to ₹5 lakh from ₹3 lakh available currently, according to tax experts. Further, it is also expected that the finance minister may increase the scope of tax rebate under section 87A to make income up to ₹10 lakh tax-free effectively.  Total tax liability on income of ₹15 lakh under the new regime is ₹1.3 lakh for FY 2024-25. Representational image/Shutterstock The tax breakup is shown in the following table: Tax calculation shows that total tax liability on income of ₹15 lakh under the new regime is ₹1.3 lakh for FY 2024-25. This calculation done after including the standard deduction of ₹75,000 available to salaried employees and assuming no other deductions are available to the person. The calculator shows that total tax liability on income of ₹20 lakh under the new regime is ₹2.78 lakh lakh for FY 2024-25. The above calculation has been done after including the standard deduction and assuming no other deductions are applicable to the person. Apart from the above, media reports have speculated some other ways the government is considering for providing tax relief. Meanwhile, a Business Standard report has said the government may introduce a new 25% tax slab for income between ₹15 lakh and ₹20 lakh. Please note the above are only the expected changes from the upcoming budget. The actual change, if any, will be revealed on February 1, 2025. Additionally, any change in tax slabs announced in Budget 2025 will be applicable for tax filing for FY 2025-26. About The Author Next Story Popular Stocks Indian Indices Mutual Funds Tools IPO Learning Center Commodities Products Company Upstox Attention Investors & Disclaimer Upstox Securities Pvt. Ltd.: SEBI Registration No. INZ000315837 | NSE TM Code: 13942 | BSE TM Code: 6155 | CDSL Reg No.: IN-DP-761-2024 | CIN: U65100DL2021PTC376860 | Compliance Officer: Mr. Kapil Jaikalyani. Tel No.: (022) 24229920. Email ID:  compliance@upstox.com  | Registered Address: 809, New Delhi House, Barakhamba Road, Connaught Place, New Delhi - 110001 | RKSV Commodities India Pvt. Ltd.: SEBI Registration No.: INZ000015837 | MCX TM Code: 46510 | CIN: U74900DL2009PTC189166 | Compliance Officer: Mr. Amit Lalan. Tel No.: (022) 24229920. Email ID:  compliance@rksv.in  | Registered Address: 807, New Delhi House, Barakhamba Road, Connaught Place, New Delhi - 110001. Correspondence Address: 30th Floor, Sunshine Tower, Senapati Bapat Marg, Dadar (West), Mumbai - 400013. | For any complaints, email at  complaints@upstox.com  and  complaints.mcx@upstox.com. Procedure to file a complaint on  SEBI SCORES: Register on the SCORES portal. Mandatory details for filing complaints on SCORES include: Name, PAN, Address, Mobile Number, and E-mail ID. Benefits include effective communication and speedy redressal of grievances. Please ensure you carefully read the  Risk Disclosure Document as prescribed by SEBI, along with our  Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Upstox Securities Private Limited is a wholly owned subsidiary of RKSV Securities India Private Limited and RKSV Commodities India Private Limited is an associate of RKSV Securities India Private Limited. Disclaimer: Investment in securities market are subject to market risks, read all the related documents carefully before investing.
*Brokerage will not exceed the SEBI prescribed limit. Risk disclosures on derivatives - Mutual Funds: Top rated funds do not constitute any advice. Research data is powered by Morningstar. Please read the offer documents carefully before investing. Upstox shall not accept any liability arising out of your investments.
These are not Exchange traded products, and the Member is just acting as distributor. All disputes with respect to the distribution activity, would not have access to Exchange investor redressal forum or Arbitration mechanism. Insurance: RKSV SECURITIES INDIA PRIVATE LIMITED ("Upstox") with registered office at 807, New Delhi House Barakhamba Road Connaught Place, New Delhi, Delhi-110001, Delhi (CIN: U74900DL2009PTC189166) is a Corporate Agent registered with Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (IRDAI) (Category: Composite, IRDAI Regn No.-: CA0918 valid till 05-03-2027). Insurance is underwritten by the respective insurance companies and not by Upstox. Purchase by Upstox’s customer of any insurance products is purely voluntary, and is not linked to availment of any other facility from Upstox. For more details on risk factors and terms and conditions of insurance products, please read the sales brochure of insurance products carefully before concluding a sale. Tax benefits are subject to amendments in tax laws from time to time. Email ID or any other mode to reach out: Email ID: insurancesupport@rksv.in Bima Bharosa Portal: https://bimabharosa.irdai.gov.in/ IRDAI: https://irdai.gov.in/ Insurance Ombudsman: https://www.cioins.co.in/ BEWARE OF SPURIOUS PHONE CALLS AND FICTITIOUS/FRAUDULENT OFFERS IRDAI is not involved in activities like selling insurance policies, announcing bonuses, or investing premiums. Public receiving such phone calls are requested to lodge a police complaint. Attention Investors: As per NSE circular dated July 6, 2022, BSE circular dated July 6, 2022, MCX circular dated July 11, 2022 investors are cautioned to abstain them from dealing in any schemes of unauthorised collective investments/portfolio management, indicative/ guaranteed/fixed returns / payments etc. Investors are further cautioned to avoid practices like:
a) Sharing i) trading credentials – login id & passwords including OTP’s., ii) trading strategies, iii) position details.
b) Trading in leveraged products /derivatives like Options without proper understanding, which could lead to losses.
c) Writing/ selling options or trading in option strategies based on tips, without basic knowledge & understanding of the product and its risks
d) Dealing in unsolicited tips through like Whatsapp, Telegram, Instagram, YouTube, Facebook, SMS, calls, etc.
e) Trading / Trading in “Options” based on recommendations from unauthorised / unregistered investment advisors and influencers. Kindly, read the Advisory Guidelines For Investors as prescribed by the Exchange with reference to their circular dated 27th August, 2021 regarding investor awareness and safeguarding client’s assets :  Advisory Guidelines For Investors Kindly, read the advisory as prescribed by the Exchange with reference to their circular dated January 14, 2022 regarding Updation of mandatory KYC fields by March 31, 2022:  KYC Updation Attention Investors: Prevent unauthorised transactions in your Demat account by updating your mobile number with your depository participant. Receive alerts on your registered mobile number for debit and other important transactions in your Demat account directly from CDSL on the same day. Prevent unauthorised transactions in your Trading account by updating your mobile numbers/email addresses with your stock brokers. Receive information on your transactions directly from the Exchange on your mobile/email at the end of the day. Issued in the interest of investors. KYC is a one-time exercise while dealing in securities markets - once KYC is done through a SEBI-registered intermediary (broker, DP, Mutual Fund, etc.), you need not undergo the same process again when you approach another intermediary. As a business, we don’t give stock tips and have not authorised anyone to trade on behalf of others. If you find anyone claiming to be part of Upstox or RKSV and offering such services, please send us an email at  complaints@upstox.com  and  complaints.mcx@upstox.com. No need to issue cheques by investors while subscribing to IPO. Just write the bank account number and sign in the application form to authorise your bank to make payment in case of allotment. No worries for refund as the money remains in investor’s account.
Stockbrokers can accept securities as margin from their clients only by way of a pledge in the depository system w.e.f. 1st September 2020.
Update your email ID and mobile number with your stockbroker/depository participant and receive an OTP directly from the depository on your registered email ID and/or mobile number to create a pledge.
Check your securities/mutual funds/bonds in the Consolidated Account Statement (CAS) issued by NSDL/CDSL every month. Attention Investors: SEBI has established an Online Dispute Resolution Portal (ODR Portal) for resolving disputes in the Indian Securities Market. This circular streamlines the existing dispute resolution mechanism, offering online conciliation and arbitration, benefiting investors and listed companies.  https://www.sebi.gov.in/legal/circulars/jul-2023/online-resolution-of-disputes-in-the-indian-securities-market_74794.html
ODR portal for Investors -  https://smartodr.in/login Made with ❤️ in India | Copyright © 2025, Upstox