February 1, 2025e-Paper 
									The Hindu On Books
									Books of the week, reviews, excerpts, new titles and features.
 
									Data Point
									Decoding the headlines with facts, figures, and numbers
 
									First Day First Show
									News and reviews from the world of cinema and streaming.
 
									Health Matters
									Ramya Kannan writes to you on getting to good health, and staying there
 
									The View From India
									Looking at World Affairs from the Indian perspective.
 
									Science For All
									The weekly newsletter from science writers takes the jargon out of science and puts the fun in!
 
									Karnataka Today
									Your daily dose of news highlights from Karnataka
 
									Today's Cache
									Your download of the top 5 technology stories of the day.
 February 1, 2025e-Paper Updated  - February 02, 2025 12:42 am IST  
                    Govt. proposes nil tax on income up to ₹12 lakh per annum under new tax regime, Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman said in her Union Budget 2025 speech in the Parliament, in New Delhi, on February 1. 2025.. (Representational image only)
                                       With an objective to boost household consumption and aggregate demand, Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman announced on Saturday that incomes up to ₹12 lakh would draw no income tax. Effectively, with the existing standard deduction of ₹75,000 in the new tax regime, the limit now stands revised to ₹12.75 lakh.  With the same objective, the Finance Minister announced a revision in tax slabs, and in order to ease difficulties for the benefit of small taxpayers, she proposed measures for rationalisation of tax deducted at source (TDS) and tax collected at source (TCS) structures.   Explaining the rationale for the revision in taxation limit, the Minister said the new structure would substantially reduce taxes for the middle class and provide more disposable income, thus helping boost household consumption, savings and investment.   As for the revision in tax rate structures, earnings up to ₹4 lakh would not bear any rate of taxation. The highest slab, that is for incomes exceeding ₹24 lakh, would bear a taxation rate of 30% (refer to the table).  

                            Source: Union Budget 2025-26 document
                                                     Also read: Union Budget 2025 updates Presenting examples, the Minister explained to the house that an income of ₹12 lakh would receive a benefit of ₹80,000 in taxes, that is, 100% of taxes payable at existing rates. Those with an income of ₹18 lakh would receive a benefit of ₹70,000, that is, 30% of tax payable at existing rates.  Akhil Chandna, partner at Grant Thorton Bharat told The Hindu that providing more disposable income to people, would in turn come back to the government when they spend the money.   Furthermore, reflecting on the overall set of changes, Poorva Prakash, partner at Deloitte India, observed that the latest revisions would help boost the attractiveness of the new tax regime from the older tax regime which provided for deductions and exemptions. “This is good in a way, especially from an employer’s perspective, for (with a single tax regime) there is lesser burden about tax administration,” she said.   Fourth revision in Modi-era  Saturday’s revision in income tax limit was the fourth under the Narendra Modi administration. The first of these was undertaken in 2014 (up to ₹2.5 lakh), second in 2019 (up to ₹5 lakh) and third in 2023 (up to ₹7 lakh).   Ms. Sitharaman informed the house that as a result of the proposals announced on Saturday, revenue of about ₹1 lakh crore would be foregone in direct taxes and ₹2,600 crore in indirect taxes.  Ms. Sitharaman proposed to rationalise tax deducted at source (TDS) by reducing the number of rates and thresholds above which TDS is levied. In addition to this, she proposed, threshold amounts for tax deduction be increased for “better clarity and uniformity”.   According to Ms. Prakash, the primary intent about altering rates and thresholds is to manage the volume of transactions under the existing structure. “This, in turn, would help build further compliance,” she said.   Also read:  Nirmala Sitharaman’s full speech About the revisions, the Finance Minister sought the limit for tax deduction on interest for senior citizens be doubled from the present ₹50,000 to ₹1 lakh. Similarly, the present annual limit of ₹2.4 lakh for TDS on rent be increased to ₹6 lakh. “This will reduce the number of transaction liable to TDS, thus benefitting small taxpayers receiving small payments,” she stated.   Furthermore, the threshold to tax collect at source (TCS) on remittances under the central bank’s Liberalised Remittance Scheme (LRS) was proposed to be increased from ₹7 lakh to ₹10 lakh. More importantly, the Finance Minister proposed to remove TCS on remittances for education purposes – which could potentially entail a loan taken from a bank.   Other than this, the Finance Minister also proposed to omit TCS. This was to avert incidence wherein both TDS and TCS were being applied in conjunction to the sale of goods. According to Mr. Chandna, this would be of relief for business-to-business transactions. “Collecting TDS from buyers and TCS from sellers for the same transaction would be averted. This helps ease compliance burden,” he said.   Published - February 01, 2025 12:51 pm IST 
                        budgets and budgeting
                    
                            /                      
                        
                        Union Budget
                    
                            /                      
                        
                        taxes and duties
                    
                            /                      
                        
                        personal income
                     
					Copyright© 2025, THG PUBLISHING PVT LTD. or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved.
				 BACK TO TOP Terms & conditions  |  Institutional Subscriber Comments have to be in English, and in full sentences. They cannot be abusive or personal. Please abide by our community guidelines   for posting your comments.  We have migrated to a new commenting platform. If you are already a registered user of The Hindu and logged in, you may continue to engage with our articles. If you do not have an account please register and login to post comments. Users can access their older comments by logging into their accounts on Vuukle.